feat(ena-submission): Upload ena submission results to Loculus (#2417)
loculus-project/loculus: ena-submission/README.md

   postgres:latest
```

### Install and run flyway

> In our kubernetes pod we run flyway in a docker container, however when running locally it is [download the flyway CLI](https://documentation.red-gate.com/fd/command-line-184127404.html) (or `brew install flyway` on macOS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our kubernetes pod we run flyway in a docker container, however when running locally it is best to [download the flyway CLI](https://documentation.red-gate.com/fd/command-line-184127404.html) (or `brew install flyway` on macOS).
```

micromamba activate loculus-ena-submission
```

### Using ENA's webin-cli

In order to submit assemblies you will also need to install ENA's `webin-cli.jar`. Their [webpage](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/webin-cli.html) offers more instructions. This pipeline has been tested with `WEBIN_CLI_VERSION=7.3.1`.

```sh
wget -q "https://github.com/enasequence/webin-cli/releases/download/${WEBIN_CLI_VERSION}/webin-cli-${WEBIN_CLI_VERSION}.jar" -O /package/webin-cli.jar
```

### Running snakemake

Then run snakemake using `snakemake` or `snakemake {rule}`.

### Run tests

```sh
micromamba activate loculus-ena-submission
python3 scripts/test_ena_submission.py
```

### Testing submission locally

ENA-submission currently is only triggered after manual approval.

The `get_ena_submission_list` runs as a cron-job. It queries Loculus for new sequences to submit to ENA (these are sequences that are in state OPEN, were not submitted by the INSDC_INGEST_USER, do not include ena external_metadata fields and are not yet in the submission_table of the ena-submission schema). If it finds new sequences it sends a notification to slack with all sequences.

> It is then the reviewer's turn to review these sequences. [TODO: define review criteria] If these sequences meet our criteria they should be uploaded to [pathoplexus/ena-submission](https://github.com/pathoplexus/ena-submission/blob/main/approved/approved_ena_submission_list.json) (currently we read data from the [test folder](https://github.com/pathoplexus/ena-submission/blob/main/test/approved_ena_submission_list.json) - but this will be changed to the `approved` folder in production). The `trigger_submission_to_ena` rule is constantly checking this folder for new sequences and adding them to the submission_table if they do not exist. Note we cannot yet handle revisions so these should not be added to the approved list [TODO: do not allow submission of revised sequences in `trigger_submission_to_ena`]- revisions will still have to be performed manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is then the reviewer's turn to review these sequences. [TODO: define review criteria] If these sequences meet our criteria they should be uploaded to [pathoplexus/ena-submission](https://github.com/pathoplexus/ena-submission/blob/main/approved/approved_ena_submission_list.json) (currently we read data from the [test folder](https://github.com/pathoplexus/ena-submission/blob/main/test/approved_ena_submission_list.json) - but this will be changed to the `approved` folder in production). The `trigger_submission_to_ena` rule is constantly checking this folder for new sequences and adding them to the submission_table if they are not already there. Note we cannot yet handle revisions so these should not be added to the approved list [TODO: do not allow submission of revised sequences in `trigger_submission_to_ena`]- revisions will still have to be performed manually.
```

Reviewer: Can we raise an Issue for the second TODO before merging this

Author: I added a check for this in the code to prevent us from accidentally submitting revisions :-) there is already an issue on figuring out how to handle revisions to ENA: https://github.com/loculus-project/loculus/issues/2428
